Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Multiple Parietal Reach Regions in Humans: Cortical
Representations for Visual and Proprioceptive Feedback
during On-Line Reaching
Flavia Filimon,1,3 Jonathan D. Nelson,2,3,4 Ruey-Song Huang,1 andMartin I. Sereno1,5,6
Departments of 1Cognitive Science and 2Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, 3Max Planck
Institute for Human Development, 14195 Berlin, Germany, 4Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, 5School of Psychology, Birkbeck College, LondonWC1E 7HX, United Kingdom, and 6Birkbeck/University College London Neuroimaging
Centre, LondonWC1H 0AP, United Kingdom
Reaching toward a visual target involves at least two sources of information. One is the visual feedback from the hand as it approaches the
target. Another is proprioception from the moving limb, which informs the brain of the location of the hand relative to the target even
when the hand is not visible. Where these two sources of information are represented in the human brain is unknown. In the present
study, we investigated the cortical representations for reaching with or without visual feedback from themoving hand, using functional
magnetic resonance imaging. To identify reach-dominant areas, we compared reaching with saccades. Our results show that a reach-
dominant region in the anterior precuneus (aPCu), extending into medial intraparietal sulcus, is equally active in visual and nonvisual
reaching. A second region, at the superior end of the parieto-occipital sulcus (sPOS), ismore active for visual than for nonvisual reaching.
These results suggest that aPCu is a sensorimotor area whose sensory input is primarily proprioceptive, while sPOS is a visuomotor area
that receives visual feedback during reaching. In addition to the precuneus, medial, anterior intraparietal, and superior parietal cortex
were also activated during both visual and nonvisual reaching, with more anterior areas responding to handmovements only andmore
posterior areas responding to both hand and eye movements. Our results suggest that cortical networks for reaching are differentially
activated depending on the sensory conditions during reaching. This indicates the involvement of multiple parietal reach regions in
humans, rather than a single homogenous parietal reach region.
Introduction
The parietal lobe contains sensorimotor representations that use
sensory input, e.g., vision, to guide interactions with the environ-
ment, e.g., reaching to a target. Whereas macaque neurophysiol-
ogy has revealed parietal regions that use various sensory repre-
sentations (visual, somatosensory) to guidemultiple actions (eye,
limb, head movements), the human homologs of those sensori-
motor representations remain unclear (Culham et al., 2006),
both in terms of effector specificity of themotor component (e.g.,
hand vs eye) and in terms of the sensory input driving the action
(vision or somatosensation). For instance, both visual and pro-
prioceptive feedback from the limb can guide on-line reaching.
How these two sources of information map onto human parietal
reach regions is unknown.
In macaques, several medial posterior parietal areas contain
neurons that respond more during reaching than saccades, in-
cluding area 5, V6A, andMIP, which partly overlaps the “parietal
reach region” (PRR) (Kalaska, 1996; Fattori et al., 2001; Andersen
and Buneo, 2002; Galletti et al., 2003).
Human functional neuroimaging has yielded inconclusive re-
sults on the human homolog(s) of macaque parietal reach re-
gions, perhaps because most studies have used pointing prepara-
tion rather than actual reaching (Connolly et al., 2000, 2003;
Astafiev et al., 2003; Fernandez-Ruiz et al., 2007; Hagler et al.,
2007). Finger pointing is a much smaller movement than reach-
ing, which may not recruit areas controlling the arm. In natural
reaching, hands are not preshaped into a fist with the index finger
extended, which ismore typical of communicative gestures (Cul-
ham and Valyear, 2006; Culham et al., 2006). Reaching to point
(with the index finger) (Prado et al., 2005), reaching to grasp
(Grafton et al., 1996; Culham et al., 2008), and reaching to touch
(Pellijeff et al., 2006; Levy et al., 2007; Culham et al., 2008) acti-
vate medial parietal cortex, although various locations and acti-
vationmagnitudes (relative to saccades) have been reported. Im-
portantly, various precuneus regions, including anterior
precuneus (aPCu) and superior parieto-occipital sulcus (sPOS),
have been labeled “human PRR.”
Recently, execution of visually guided reaching without
touching, pointing, or grasping was shown to activate the entire
superior extent of the precuneus, from the POS to the cingulate
Received July 8, 2008; revised Jan. 16, 2009; accepted Jan. 26, 2009.
This work was funded by National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant BCS 0224321 toM.I.S. and by NSF Integrative
Graduate Education and Research Traineeship Program Grant DGE-0333451 to G. W. Cottrell and V. R. de Sa. We
thank the University of California, San Diego fMRI Center, in particular, Giedrius T. Buracas, for technical support.We
thank E. Todorov, G. Boynton, and J. Stiles for feedback on this manuscript and D. J. Hagler, Jr., for providing the
original code for clustering and averaging.
Correspondence should be addressed to Flavia Filimon, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Ko¨nigin-
Luise-Strasse 5, 14195 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: ffilimon@cogsci.ucsd.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3211-08.2009
Copyright © 2009 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/09/292961-11$15.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 • 2961
sulcus (Filimonet al., 2007).Does theprecu-
neus map visual input from the hand, or
proprioceptive feedback,duringmovement?
To investigate the medial parietal rep-
resentations of visual versus propriocep-
tive feedback during reaching, we com-
pared reaching with the hand visible and
nonvisible. Whereas visual reaching in-
volves both visual feedback and proprio-
ception, nonvisual reaching requires on-
line monitoring of proprioceptive
feedback during the transport phase. This
information is used to calculate where the
hand is in space, relative to the target,
without vision. Parietal reach-related re-
gions exhibiting increased activation dur-
ing visible compared with nonvisible
reaches would reveal modulation from vi-
sual feedback. Parietal regions involved in
on-line reaching that are not modulated
by visual feedback would suggest proprio-
ceptive input. Subjects used nondelayed
(immediately executed), direct (without-
a-mirror) reaching (involving the forearm
and an open hand) toward external pe-
ripheral targets. To identify reach-
dominant areas, we also contrasted reach-
ing with saccades. Given previous
descriptions of multiple precuneus foci as
human PRR, we examined how
proprioceptive-only versus visual-and-
proprioceptive arm feedback modulates
precuneus activations.
Results show that aPCu is activated
equally whether or not the reaching hand
is seen, whereas superior POS responds
more during visual reaching. This suggests
that aPCu is predominantly propriocep-
tive–motor and sPOS is predominantly
visuomotor.
Materials andMethods
Subjects. Eight subjects (4 males and 4 females,
age range 21–33) participated in this experi-
ment. All subjects were neurologically intact
and right handed, andhadnormal or corrected-
to-normal vision. All subjects gave written in-
formed consent. The experimental procedures
were approved by the University of California,
San Diego Institutional Review Board.
Stimuli. Stimuli were fiber-optic targets mounted on a custom-made
black screen (for a schematic, see Fig. 1a). The fixation point and each
target consisted of the endpoint of a single optical fiber. The other end of
each optical fiber (located outside the scanner room) was illuminated by
a dim light-emitting diode (LED) controlled by a custom-made circuit
board designed by R.-S.H. (see Huang and Sereno, 2008). Only one of
five possible targets was illuminated at one time. The screen was
mounted 35 cm in front of the subject, with the subject’s head tilted
forward for a direct view. The fiber-optic targets were arranged horizon-
tally7° apart and7° below a fiber-optic fixation point, with the total
display subtending35°. All other sources of light inside the scanner room
were turned off or covered up. The fiber-optic lightswere dimmed such that
a hand movement executed below each target was not visible to a subject
inside the scanner. Each of the fiber-optic targets was turned on at random
using a custom-made program on a Shuttle PC running RedHat Linux.
Experimental task. Subjects were instructed to (1) reach to targets in
the periphery while maintaining central fixation, (2) saccade, or (3) fix-
ate. The targets were very dim fiber-optic points located horizontally
below the fixation point (Fig. 1a). This was necessary to allow for reach-
ing to just below each target, such that the hand would not obstruct the
visual target or fixation point and thereby provide visual feedback as to its
location. Subjects were instructed not to touch the screen. Reaching was
done either in darkness, with no visual feedback from the hand (nonvi-
sual direct reach), or in light, for which a bundle of optical fibers attached
to the scanner bore above the subject’s chest was turned on. A bright LED
located inside the console room illuminated the bundle of optical fibers.
The light illuminated the subject’s hand during the reach, thus providing
visual feedback (visual direct reach). Both kinds of reaching were exe-
cuted directly toward the screen, in the same plane. Reaches were exe-
cuted immediately, without delay. A pseudorandomblock order of visual
Figure 1. Stimuli and experimental design. A, Three reach and three saccade trials illustrating example target presentation in
the experiment, out of a total of five possible target locations. The fixation point is indicated in red. A random order of blocks of
visual reach (vR), nonvisual reach (nvR), fixate (F), and saccade (S) trials was used. B, Subject positioning inside the scanner.
Subjects lay supinewith thehead tilted forward for a direct viewof the screen. Subjectsmoved thehanddirectly toward the screen
while fixating in the center.
2962 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations
direct reach, nonvisual direct reach, saccade, and fixation trials was used.
Each block of trials lasted 30 s, with each reach trial lasting 4 s, and each
saccade trial lasting 2 s. A 2 s auditory message at the beginning of the
block indicated which condition was about to begin. Each functional run
consisted of 20 blocks total.
Magnetic resonance image data acquisition.Magnetic resonance images
were collected on a GE 3T scanner at the Center for fMRI, University of
California, San Diego, using an eight-channel head coil. Functional im-
ages were collected using an echoplanar T2* gradient echo pulse se-
quence [32 contiguous axial slices, 3.44 3.44 4 mm voxel size, 64
64 matrix, repetition time (TR)  2000 ms, 300 TRs (volumes) per
functional scan, echo time 30 ms, flip angle 90°, bandwidth 62.5
kHz]. The slice volume included the whole brain. The first four volumes
in each scan series were discarded automatically, to allow the magnetiza-
tion to reach a steady state. At least three functional scans (runs) were
acquired per subject. In addition, a T1-weighted fast spoiled gradient-
echo (FSPGR) alignment scan (1 1 1.3 mm voxel) was collected in
each scanning session to align the functional images to a previously ob-
tained high-resolution (1 1 1 mm) T1-weighted FSPGR anatomical
scan. To prevent head motion, each subject’s head was stabilized using
individual dental impressions (bite bars) supported by a four-ball-joint
yoke. In addition, foamwas packed around the head inside the head coil,
and the upper arm was immobilized with foam pads.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging data analysis. Functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were analyzed using FreeSurfer
(Fischl et al., 1999a, Dale et al., 1999) and AFNI (Cox, 1996) (for detailed
procedures, see Filimon et al., 2007). Each subject’s cortical surface was
reconstructed from the separately obtained high-resolution T1-weighted
anatomical scan using FreeSurfer. Functional images were superimposed
on the T1-weighted alignment scan collected during the functional ses-
sion and then registered with the high-resolution anatomical scan from
which the cortical surface was reconstructed. This allowed functional
activations to be painted onto each subject’s reconstructed cortical sur-
face. Functional runs were concatenated using AFNI’s 3dTcat function.
Slice-timing correction was implemented using AFNI’s tshift function.
Motion correction was implemented using AFNI’s volreg (volume reg-
istration) function, registering images to the middle TR of the middle
functional run. In five subjects there was a small amount of residual
whole-head motion resulting in “spikes” in the raw signal time series
which could not be corrected during volume registration (volreg). The
TRs affected by head motion artifact were removed from the raw data
using AFNI’s censor function. On average, 4.22% of reach TRs and
4.24% of saccade TRs were excluded from those five subjects’ data to
removemotion artifact. The percentage of TRs (brain volumes) removed
per reach, saccade, and rest (fixation) conditions to eliminate motion
artifact, were as follows: subject 1: 1.83% (reach), 1% (saccade), 1.67%
(rest); subject 2: 3.78% (reach), 2.22% (saccade), 9.33% (rest); subject 3:
7.67% (reach), 1.67% (saccade), 7.67% (rest); subject 4: 1% (reach), 0%
(saccade), 2.67% (rest); subject 5: 6.83% (reach), 16.33% (saccade), 10%
(rest). Subject 5 was the only subject with more head motion during the
saccade condition compared with the reach condition. Since the activa-
tion pattern for each condition was the same as in other subjects even
after removing the noisy TRs, subject 5 was still included in group anal-
yses. The pattern of activation was not different between these five sub-
jects and the remaining subjects, suggesting that motion artifact was
successfully removed.
Blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) responses to each exper-
imental condition were analyzed using AFNI’s 3dDeconvolve (Cox,
1996; Ward, 2000) general linear model (multiple regression), with a
regressor of interest for each condition. A quadratic polynomial was used
to fit the baseline. The 6 motion parameters obtained from volume reg-
istration were included as regressors in the baseline model to account for
variance due to motion. Hemodynamic responses were modeled at six
different lag times (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 TRs). Correlation coefficients and
F-statistics were generated for the area under the hemodynamic response
function. Visual reach, nonvisual reach, and saccade were each con-
trasted with the fixation baseline, as well as with each other (visual reach
vs saccade; nonvisual reach vs saccade, visual reach vs nonvisual reach).
Group analysis. Each subject’s reconstructed cortical surface was
sphered and registered to an average spherical surface atlas in FreeSurfer
using a best-fit sulcal alignment (Fischl et al., 1999b). Each subject’s
coefficients and F-statistics were interpolated onto the average spherical
surface after using 16 steps of surface-based smoothing, equivalent to a
full-width, half-max (FWHM) Gaussian filter of 5 mm (Hagler et al.,
2006). Activations were averaged across subjects in this spherical coordi-
nate system. A one-way, repeated-measures ANOVA was performed for
each voxel on the whole brain using AFNI’s mixed-effects, two-factor
3dANOVA2, to generate means and F-statistics of activations for each
condition versus baseline (visual direct reach, nonvisual direct reach, and
saccade), and for pairwise comparisons. Condition was a fixed effect
(with three levels), while subject was a random effect. Averaged activa-
tions and F-statistics were resampled back onto an individual subject’s
inflated cortical surface for display purposes. To correct for multiple
comparisons, we used surface-based clustering (Hagler et al., 2006).
Clusters of contiguous vertices were identified for t-statistics thresholded
at p  0.05 for the group-averaged data and p  0.001 for individual
subjects.
Region of interest analysis. We defined parietal regions of interest
(ROIs) within each subject based on both anatomical and functional
criteria. ROIs consisted of contiguous voxels located on the medial pari-
etal surface, between the POS and the cingulate sulcus.Within themedial
parietal surface, voxels were identified that were active in the visual reach
versus baseline comparison, since (1) the aim was to identify medial
parietal regions activated by reaching, and compare reach-related and
saccade-related activations within such areas; (2) visual reaching yielded
the greatest extent of reach-related activations; and (3) a separate aimwas
to see whether nonvisual reach activations and visual reach activations
differed within such areas (e.g., to identify whether nonvisual reach ac-
tivations might be weaker or less extended compared with visual reach
activations). Only contiguous voxels significant within each subject at
p 0.005, corrected, were included. This yielded an anterior precuneus
region of interest. Each subject’s data set was divided in two, with ROIs
identified in one half of the data, and percent signal change and time
series analyses performed on the other half.
An additional region of interest was identified based on the pattern of
activations for visual and nonvisual reaching compared with saccades
around the POS. The region was situated in-between the superior end of
the POS and the subparietal sulcus. These anatomical criteria were used
in addition to the same functional criteria as above to define an sPOS
region of interest in half the data, with calculations performed as noted
above on the other half of the data. The POS ROI became disconnected
from the anterior precuneus ROI at higher thresholds ( p  0.005, cor-
rected), suggesting the presence of two separate areas. ROIs were saved as
surface patches in FreeSurfer. Voxels within each patch were normalized
by their mean intensity and averaged within the ROI using MATLAB.
Percent signal change coefficients were calculated for each condition
from the normalized time series within the ROI.
Results
Figure 1 shows the experimental setup for the experiment. Note
that “visually guided reaching” could refer either to reaching
guided by a visual target or to reaching with the hand visible.
Here, we refer to reaching with the hand visible as “visual reach-
ing” and to reaching with the hand nonvisible as “nonvisual
reaching.”Moreover, since reacheswere executed directly toward
the peripheral visual targets, we refer to this as “direct” reaching
(as opposed to, e.g., indirect reaches toward hidden targets). In
the present experiment, subjects executed visual and nonvisual
direct reaches or saccades to peripheral visual targets in front of
them. Subjects reached from below toward the dim targets, with-
out moving the hand on top of the targets, so that no visual
feedback could be gained from obstructing the light source. All
subjects confirmed that they could not see their hand in the non-
visual condition. During the visual reach condition, a bright
fiber-optic light taped to the ceiling of the scanner bore illumi-
nated the subject’s moving hand. This allowed for a direct com-
Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 • 2963
parison of visual direct reachingwith nonvisual direct reaching to
the same targets, in the same reach plane. Central fixation was
maintained during both visual and nonvisual reaching. All
reaches were executed immediately, without a delay.
Figure 2 shows group-average activations ( p  0.05, cor-
rected) for visual direct reaching, nonvisual direct reaching, and
saccades, versus fixation. Both kinds of reaching elicited a very
similar pattern of frontoparietal activations compared with base-
line, including dorsal and ventral premotor, supplementary mo-
tor, primary somatomotor, cingulate, intraparietal, superior pa-
rietal, and medial parietal cortical activations. Activations were
bilateral but stronger in the left hemisphere, with primary so-
matomotor activations entirely left lateralized, as expected for
right-handed subjects moving their right hand only.
As shown in Figure 2, both visual and nonvisual reaching
strongly activated the precuneus (medial parietal cortex) bilater-
ally, from the posterior end of the cingulate sulcus through to the
POS, continuing into the cuneus. The superior aspect of the POS
was activated more strongly by visual reaching than by nonvisual
reaching.
Saccades activated a frontoparietal network of brain regions
that partly overlapped with reaching activations (Fig. 2, bottom
row). Saccade activations were bilateral and included the frontal
and supplementary eye fields (superior frontal sulcus/gyrus), the
inferior precentral sulcus/gyrus, the intraparietal sulcus (IPS)
and superior parietal gyrus (parietal eye fields), and the occipital
cortex, including V1, the cuneus, lingual gyrus, and superior oc-
cipital gyrus. The precuneus was only weakly activated by sac-
cades, bilaterally.
Both visual reaching and saccades strongly activated area V1
(calcarine sulcus), the lingual gyrus, precuneus, and the lateral
and superior occipital gyri, due to visual stimulation from the
hand during reaching, and due to foveation of targets during
saccades (Fig. 2, top and bottom rows). Occipital activations dur-
ing nonvisual reaching were greatly reduced compared with vi-
sual reaching or saccades, and did not extend into the calcarine
sulcus or lingual gyrus (Fig. 2, middle row). Some occipital acti-
vation during nonvisual reaching was expected, as the peripheral
fiber-optic targets provided visual stimulation even when the
hand did not. A posterior region of the lateral occipital gyrus,
Figure 2. BOLD activations for visual direct reaching, nonvisual direct reaching, and saccades. Group surface-averaged activations (n 8) for visual and nonvisual direct reaching and saccades,
versus baseline, are shown on dorsal, medial, and posterior views of the left and right inflated cortical hemispheres. Note the similarity in activation between visual and nonvisual direct reaching in
thegreen-circled anterior precuneus region (medial view). Saccade activations in the sameanterior precuneus ROI aremuchweaker. Visual direct reaching also activates the sPOSmore strongly than
saccades or nonvisual direct reaching (see arrows and small purple-blue circle). Sulci are marked with a dashed green line. CS, Central sulcus; L, left; R, right.
2964 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations
includingMT (Fig. 2, dorsal and posterior views) was activated
during nonvisual reaching as well as during visual reaching, con-
sistent with tactile input to parts of MT (MST) (Beauchamp et
al., 2007); part of this region may also represent the extrastriate
body area, which responds to hand movement (Astafiev et al.,
2004).
To identify reach-dominant areas, we subtracted saccade-
related activations from visual direct and nonvisual direct reach-
ing activations (Fig. 3a, top and middle rows).
Our hypothesis was that a possible human homolog of the
macaque parietal reach region, located on the medial surface of
the parietal lobe, would also be more active during visual and
nonvisual reaching than during saccades. Indeed, visual direct
reaching activated the anterior part of the precuneus (circled in
green) and the superior POS (circled in purple-blue) significantly
more strongly than saccades, bilaterally (Fig. 3a, top row) ( p 
0.05, corrected). Nonvisual direct reaching also activated the an-
terior part of the precuneus significantly more than saccades, but
showed no difference in activation in the superior POS, bilater-
ally (Fig. 3a, middle row, central panel). Analysis of more strin-
gent thresholds ( p 0.001; data not shown) revealed that ante-
rior precuneus activations for nonvisual reaching versus saccades
were stronger in the left hemisphere than the right; i.e., contralat-
eral to the moving hand.
In addition to the anterior precuneus, other areas more
strongly activated by both visual reaching and nonvisual reaching
than by saccades included the anterior intraparietal sulcus (puta-
tive AIP), the supramarginal gyrus, medial intraparietal sulcus
(putative MIP), and superior parietal gyrus in the posterior pari-
etal lobe, as well as dorsal premotor cortex, primary somatosen-
sory and primary motor cortex (precentral and postcentral gyri),
and supplementary motor cortex (Fig. 3a, top and middle rows),
with activations stronger or lateralized to the left hemisphere.
Visual reaching also activated the occipital lobe and middle oc-
cipital cortex (MT) more than saccades bilaterally. Saccades
activated the left occipital pole and right occipital lobemore than
nonvisual reaching, confirming that subjects did not have visual
input from the hand during nonvisual reaching and did not fo-
veate the targets during reaching. Saccades activated the left and
right inferior central sulcus (eye representation)more than either
type of reaching.
To identify parietal areas modulated by visual feedback from
the hand during reaching, we compared visual reaching with
nonvisual reaching (Fig. 3a, bottom row). This comparison re-
vealed significantly stronger activations ( p 0.05, corrected) for
visual reaching than nonvisual reaching around the sPOS, at the
parieto-occipital junction, bilaterally. In contrast, the anterior
precuneus and the rest of the parietal lobe did not differ signifi-
cantly in activation between visual and nonvisual reaching. To
confirm that our statistical correction was not overly stringent,
we also compared visual andnonvisual reaching activations at the
uncorrected 0.05 level, which still yielded no difference in the
anterior precuneus. The sPOS activation also extended more an-
teriorly into the posteromedial aspect of the IPS; however, this
anterior activation did not survive p 0.01. Since that regionwas
activated equally for saccades when comparing both visual reach
versus saccades and nonvisual reach versus saccades, it likely rep-
resents an effector-independent visual representation of visual
stimuli (whether a hand or other stimulus).
In addition to sPOS, visual and nonvisual reaching activations
(Fig. 3a, bottom row) differed in the occipital lobe, with the cu-
neus, calcarine sulcus, lingual gyrus, and superior and lateral oc-
cipital gyri (includingMT) being significantlymore active dur-
ing visual direct reaching than during nonvisual direct reaching
( p  0.05, corrected). This is consistent with the greater visual
stimulation provided by the visual reach than the nonvisual
reach.
Figure 3a thus suggests that on the medial parietal wall, two
areas contribute differentially to reaching: the anterior precuneus
participates equally in visual and nonvisual reaching. We denote
this region as the anterior precuneus reach region, or “aPCu” in
short. In contrast, an area at the superior aspect of the parieto-
occipital sulcus, or sPOS, was more strongly activated by visual
reaching than by either saccades or nonvisual reaching.
Figure 3b shows the time course of activity and percent signal
change in the left anterior precuneus across all three conditions.
Percent signal change in BOLD signals for visual and nonvisual
reaching in aPCu did not differ significantly (t(7)  0.44, n.s.).
The magnitude of BOLD signal change in aPCu was significantly
less for saccades than either for visual reaching (t(7) 6.98, two-
tailed p  0.0004) or for nonvisual reaching (t(7)  3.61, two-
tailed p 0.01).
Figure 3c shows the percent signal change in the left sPOS for
visual and nonvisual reaching and for saccades. Percent signal
change in BOLD signals in the left sPOS was significantly greater
for visual reaching than for nonvisual reaching (t(7) 3.34, two-
tailed p 0.01) and than for saccades (t(7) 3.71, two-tailed p
0.004). Nonvisual reaching and saccade percent signal change did
not differ in the left sPOS (t(7)  1.41, n.s.). This pattern is
consistent with sPOS having a largely visuomotor role, and aPCu
a predominantly proprioceptive–motor role, in reaching. Table 1
shows the average x, y, z coordinates for the two ROIs.
To more closely examine the difference between the various
parietal areas activated more strongly by both kinds of reaching
than by saccades, and their relationship to the anterior precu-
neus, we implemented a conjunction analysis in AFNI. As can be
seen from Figure 2, the aPCu is strongly activated by both visual
and nonvisual reaching, and is weakly (but significantly, at p 
0.05) activated by saccades. Figure 3, a and b, showed that aPCu is
equally activated by visual and nonvisual reaching. To search for
any other areas that behave similarly, we used a whole-brain con-
junction analysis to identify voxels satisfying of all of these crite-
ria: (1) the voxel is activated by visual reach, nonvisual reach, and
saccade, above baseline at p 0.05; AND (2) the voxel is signifi-
cantly more active in both visual reach versus saccade and non-
visual reach versus saccade ( p  0.05); i.e., visual reach  sac-
cade  0; AND nonvisual reach  saccade 0; AND (3) visual
reach nonvisual reach 0 ( p 0.05, n.s.).
Figure 4a shows the result of this conjunction on an inflated
left hemisphere (contralateral to the moving hand), with voxels
satisfying all three criteria shown in yellow. As expected, an area
located in the anterior precuneus (medial parietal cortex) and
overlapping with the aPCu activations shown in Figures 2 and 3a,
satisfies these criteria. Interestingly, the anterior precuneus acti-
vations are joined to a posterior parietal area in the medial in-
traparietal sulcus (medial IPS, or mIPS), which extends to the
superior (dorsal) aspect of posterior parietal cortex. This area
might correspond tomacaqueMIP,which has also been shown to
be involved in reaching in macaques. In addition to aPCu and
medial IPS, dorsal premotor cortex (superior frontal gyrus) and
the supplementarymotor cortex (SMA) also satisfy these criteria.
This is expected, since parietofrontal circuits underlie reaching in
the macaque, with both parietal and premotor areas contribut-
ing. Thus, it appears that within posterior parietal cortex, only
medial IPS and aPCu participate in all three conditions, with
greater activation to visual and nonvisual reaching than to sac-
Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 • 2965
2966 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations
cades, and equal involvement in visual and nonvisual reaching.
Notice the dip in the V-like activation pattern: the bottom of the
V lies on the crest of the inflated surface and thereby separates the
medial (precuneus) activation from the dorsal (mIPS) activation
(Fig. 4a).
Figure 4b shows multiple conjunctions overlaid on the in-
flated left hemisphere. In green, only voxels are shown that are
strongly activated by both visual and nonvisual reaching ( p 
0.01) but not by saccades. As can be seen in Figure 4b, parietal
voxels activated only by reaching and not by saccades are anterior
as well as lateral to the aPCu and mIPS activations identified by
the conjunction in Figure 4a. From amedial view (Fig. 4b, middle
panel), most of these voxels fall inside the posterior end of the
cingulate sulcus, extending dorsally onto the very anterior aspect
of the superior parietal gyrus. This location is consistent with
what in the macaque would be called area 5 (Cavada, 2001),
which mostly responds during hand movements but not during
saccades, consistent with our analysis. The more anterior IPS
activations (green) lateral of the yellow cluster might correspond
(at least in anatomical location) to macaque areas 7a and AIP,
also involved in hand movements (Andersen and Buneo, 2002).
Voxelsmore anterior than the anterior IPS fall inside the primary
somatosensory cortex (postcentral gyrus).
Voxels more active during visual reach compared with nonvi-
sual reach are overlaid in light blue (Fig. 4b), showing that only
areas located more posteriorly, at the parieto-occipital junction
(sPOS), are modulated by vision during reaching.
Figure 4c shows a conjunction between activations for all three
conditions, i.e., voxels activated significantly by visual reaching,
nonvisual reaching, and saccades, at p  0.05 (pale yellow) and
p  0.01 (red). This figure shows that as the threshold is raised,
the medial activation (aPCu) becomes disconnected from the
more dorsal mIPS activation, suggesting that although coacti-
vated in the conjunction mask in Figure 4a, these could be two
functionally distinct areas.
Our results thus show that (1) the precuneus has functionally
distinct subregions. Specifically, the anterior precuneus is not
modulated by sight of the hand during reaching, suggesting pro-
prioceptive input, whereas the sPOS is modulated by sight of the
hand; (2) the anterior precuneus is coactivated with medial IPS,
although the two areas become disconnected at higher thresh-
olds, implying some functional separation; and (3) as seen in
Figure 4b, there is a gradual transition in functional characteris-
tics from anterior to posterior parts of the posterior parietal lob-
ule. This transition is from (i) reach-only areas (in green), which
do not respond to saccades, in the very anterior parts of the
posterior parietal lobule and at the posterior end of the cingulate
sulcus, to (ii) both-reach-and-saccade areas (in yellow) inmedial
IPS and anterior precuneus, which respond more strongly and
equally to both reaches compared with saccades, showing no vi-
sualmodulation, to (iii)more posterior reach areasmodulated by
vision of the hand and saccades (in blue, sPOS).
Thus, whereas previous fMRI studies in humans have labeled
various parts of the precuneus “human PRR,” our current anal-
ysis shows that in fact the anterior part of the precuneus responds
equally during visual and nonvisual reaches, and more weakly
during saccades, as does medial IPS. In contrast, the more poste-
rior sPOS area is modulated by vision of the hand during the
reach. Our results thus argue for multiple parietal reach regions,
with different roles in visual as opposed to proprioceptively
guided reaching, rather than a “single parietal reach region.”
Figure 5 shows contrast activations for visual reach versus
saccade, nonvisual reach versus saccade, and visual versus nonvi-
sual reach ( p 0.0001, corrected) from three representative sub-
jects. Every subject showed significantly greater activation in
aPCu for visual and nonvisual reaching compared with saccades,
bilaterally. Figure 5 also shows greater sPOS activation for visual
versus nonvisual reaching; this pattern was true in all but one
subject.
Supplemental data from a separate experiment on imagined,
observed, and executed visual reaching (see supplemental Fig. S1,
available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material) show
that both sPOS and aPCu are activated by reaching imagery
alone, when no visual feedback or somatosensory input from the
hand are available. Thus, sPOS and aPCu are not purely visual or
purely somatosensory, respectively.
We also performed two additional experiments. In the first
experiment, subjects saccaded or reached to visual targets dis-
played around the fixation cross in both the lower and upper
visual field, with the hand in sight (see supplemental Fig. S2,
available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). In the
second experiment, subjects saw the same visual targets as in the
first additional experiment, except that reaching was performed
out of sight on a hidden plate to the right of the subject, with no
visual feedback from the hand (see supplemental Fig. S3, avail-
Table 1. AverageMNI-space coordinates (in millimeters) for peak activations in the aPCu and superior POS regions of interest
Contrast ROI x y z No. of subjects
Vis. reach saccade Left aPCu 9 1.7 54  3.1 60  1.2 7
Right aPCu 11 0.9 54  2.4 58  2.1 7
Non-vis. reach saccade Left aPCu 11 1.3 58  3.0 61  1.8 7
Right aPCu 12 1.2 57  2.6 60  1.8 7
Vis. reach non-vis. reach Left sPOS 9 1.9 77  2.1 46  1.7 6
Right sPOS 13 1.7 78  1.7 45  2.8 7
The SEM () is indicated to the right of each x, y, and z coordinate. One of the eight subjects had anomalous (30 mm different) MNI coordinates and was thus excluded. All activations were at p 0.001 (corrected).
4
Figure 3. Contrasts between activations for visual direct reaching and saccades, nonvisual
direct reaching and saccades, and visual and nonvisual direct reaching. A, Contrast activations.
Red to yellow indicates greater activation for the condition subtracted from; blue to light blue
indicates greater activation for the subtracted condition. Both kinds of reaching activate the
aPCu more than saccades. Note the lack of difference between visual and nonvisual direct
reaching in aPCu, circled in green (bottom row,medial view). The superior POS is indicatedwith
a black arrow and a purple-blue circle. Note the increased activation for visual direct reaching
compared with nonvisual direct reaching in the sPOS region. B, Percent signal change time
course (left) and magnitude (right) in left aPCu for visual direct reaching, nonvisual direct
reaching, and saccades, compared with baseline. Visual and nonvisual direct reaching activa-
tions are not significantly different in aPCu and exhibit a similar time course. Both kinds of
reaching were significantly different from saccades in left aPCu ( p 0.05, corrected). C, Per-
cent signal change time course (left) and magnitude (right) in the left superior POS for visual
and nonvisual reaching, and saccades. Visual reaching activates the sPOS more than either
nonvisual reaching ( p 0.01) or saccades ( p 0.004). Error bars inB and C indicate the SEM.
Bar graphs on the right represent the sum of percent signal change values at each time point
shown in the curves on the left, i.e., over 0–6 TRs. Activations to the left of graphs show visual
direct reach versus baseline ( p 0.001, corrected). cing. sulc., Cingulate sulcus; CS, central
sulcus; L, left; R, right; vis., visual.
Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 • 2967
able at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental
material). Saccades were executed as in the
first experiment. Both experiments show
the same patterns of activation in the an-
terior precuneus and sPOS as reported
here.
Discussion
We sought to identify sources of sensory
input to human medial parietal reach re-
gions during direct, immediately executed
reaches that were either visible or invisible
to subjects. We also compared visual and
nonvisual direct reaching with saccades.
Results show that an aPCu reach-
dominant region was activated equally
with or without visual feedback from the
reaching hand. aPCu was coactivated with
medial IPS, and responded more to visual
and nonvisual reaches than to saccades.
This suggests a proprioceptive input from
the moving arm in aPCu during the reach
transport phase. A second, more posterior
area at the superior POS responded more
during visual than nonvisual reaches or
saccades. sPOS may process visual feed-
back from the hand during on-line reach-
ing ormay calculate the visual distance be-
tween an effector and the target.
Area aPCu
Visual and nonvisual reaching activated
aPCu equally. Reach-related activations
were stronger in contralateral (left) aPCu,
supporting a role for proprioception. This
is consistent with left parietal damage def-
icits, e.g., optic ataxia and contralateral
proprioceptive impairments (Perenin and
Vighetto, 1988; Wolpert et al., 1998).
We always presented targets visually
while manipulating the visual presence of
Figure 4. Conjunction analyses of group activations for visual reaching (VR), nonvisual reaching (NVR), and saccades (SAC). A,
Conjunction mask showing all the voxels (yellow) that participate in visual and nonvisual reaching as well as saccades, but more
strongly in both reaches comparedwith saccades, and equally in both reaches. The left inflated hemisphere is shown. Only voxels
are shown that satisfy all of the following conditions: (1) are significantly activated ( p 0.05) by each of the following: visual
reach, nonvisual reach, and saccade compared with baseline; (2) are activated significantly more strongly ( p 0.05) by visual
reach than saccade andbynonvisual reach than saccade; and (3) are activated equally strongly by visual reach andnonvisual reach
(visual reach nonvisual reach 0, n.s.). Voxels that satisfy these requirements are found in the anterior precuneus (see green
circle and arrows), as well as an area in medial intraparietal sulcus that extends dorsally, dorsal premotor cortex, and SMA. The
circled area overlaps with the anterior precuneus activations shown in Figures 2 and 3. B, Overlay of multiple masks. Yellow,
Conjunctionmask fromA. Green,All voxels that are significantly active inbothvisual andnonvisual reaches ( p0.05)but arenot
significantly activated by saccades (n.s.). Blue, All voxels significantly ( p 0.05) more active in visual reach compared with
nonvisual reach. Note themore anterior distribution of voxels exclusively activated by either kind of reaching (green), and not by
4
saccades, in parietal cortex; medial view shows that those
activations fall mostly within the posterior cingulate sulcus.
The small purple-blue circle shows that the superior POS is
significantly more active during visual reaches than during
nonvisual reaches. C, Conjunction between all three condi-
tions: voxels significantly activated by visual reaches, nonvi-
sual reaches, and saccades, compared with baseline, are
shownatp0.05 (pale yellow)and, overlaid, atp0.01 (in
red). Note that this is a highly stringent test as voxels have to
be active at p 0.01 in each condition versus baseline, as
well as be active in all three conditions versus baseline. At
higher thresholds, themedial (anterior precuneus) activation
is becoming disconnected from the medial IPS and superior
parietal cluster (see green arrows). The small purple-blue cir-
cle shows that the superior POS is significantly activated by all
three conditions compared with baseline. All contrasts were
performed voxelwise at the whole-brain level, with surface-
based clustering used for multiple-comparison correction
(minimum cluster of 5  5 contiguous voxels). Note that
“and” means the logical AND operator. CS, Central sulcus;
cing. sulc., cingulate sulcus.
2968 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations
the hand. Common visual and nonvisual reaching activation in
aPCu could partly be due to targets, rather than proprioceptive
feedback. However, Pellijeff et al. (2006) found that eyes-closed
reaching to nonvisual targets also activated aPCu. Subjects
reached to point to the contralateral thumb or chin, with start
and end points varying. aPCu activations were greater during the
first reach following a postural change (in starting hand location
or target location) than in subsequent reaches. Activations by
postural changes without visual input strongly support proprio-
ceptive inputs to aPCu. Non-spatially directed arm movements
with eyes closed also show contralateral aPCu activation (Fili-
mon, 2008). Thus, aPCu is activated without visual input. Inter-
estingly, passive vibrotactile hand stimulation activates the pre-
cuneus (Beauchamp et al., 2007), perhaps by also stimulating
muscle receptors.
Is aPCu purely somatosensory and not motor at all? Supple-
mental Figure S1 (available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemen-
tal material) shows strong aPCu activations during imagined
reaches in the absence of proprioceptive input (see also Filimon
et al., 2007). Imagined reaching did not activate S1, M1, or V1,
suggesting that aPCu activations reflect motor preparation. This
is consistent with previous studies showing hand movement
planning without proprioceptive feedback activates aPCu
(Astafiev et al., 2003).
Passive observation of reaching can also activate aPCu (Fili-
mon et al., 2007). However, precuneus activations for both ob-
servation and imagery are weaker than for actual movement,
suggesting that proprioception is important. aPCu activations
also tended to be greater duringmotor imagery than observation,
supporting amotor role. aPCumay havemultiple populations of
neurons, some visuomotor and some proprioceptive–motor.
Nevertheless, our demonstration of equal aPCu activation for
visual and nonvisual reaching suggests a dominant propriocep-
tive–motor representation.
The nomenclature ofmedial parietal cortex is not settled. Hu-
man aPCu, and possiblymIPS,may correspond tomacaque PRR,
which comprises parts of MIP and extends medially (Snyder et
al., 1997; Andersen and Buneo, 2002), consistent with the present
mIPS and aPCu coactivation. Alternatively, aPCu may represent
macaque PEc. PEc is anterior to the POS and V6A, and responds
during both passive joint rotations and reaching movements,
supporting a role in proprioceptively directed reaching (Breveg-
lieri et al., 2006). Human cytoarchitectonic research has identi-
fied anterior–posterior precuneus divisions resembling the
present functional distinctions, proposing the terminology 7A
and 7P/7M (Scheperjans et al., 2008).
Note that our aPCu activations are more dorsal than the pre-
cuneus activations frequently considered part of the “default net-
work”, which are frequently located on the inferior precuneus
wall (Raichle and Snyder, 2007). Our results show that at least
parts of the precuneus are actively involved in motor tasks, in-
stead of being part of the “resting-state network.” This is consis-
tent with previously reported coordinates for hand movement
activations [e.g., Connolly et al. (2003) and Hagler et al. (2007)].
Superior POS
More posteriorly located sPOS could represent both the location
of the visual target relative to the visuomotor trajectory, and the
visual distance from the hand or eye to the target. sPOS activa-
tionswere stronger for visual reaching thannonvisual reaching or
saccades, suggesting that sPOS is involved in visually monitoring
how far the limb is from the target. However, nonvisual reaching
also activated sPOS. This suggests the retinal target location is
also represented in sPOS. Prado et al. (2005) found parieto-
occipital junction activations during nonvisual reaching to pe-
ripheral (as in the present study), not central, targets. The greater
activation in sPOS with a visible hand supports a role in compar-
ing the retinal locations of the hand and target.
Additional data (supplemental Fig. S1, available at www.
jneurosci.org as supplemental material) show that sPOS has mo-
tor, not purely visual, properties (Filimon et al., 2007). Left sPOS
responds strongly during imagined right-handed reaches, in the
absence of visual input from the hand. Visual cortex, in contrast,
is not activated relative to baseline, suggesting that sPOS activa-
tion is not due to visual imagery of a moving hand. Instead, the
left sPOS activation indicates motor planning. It responds ro-
bustly during imagined and executed reaches, but more weakly
during passive observation of a moving right hand. Thus, left
sPOS seems to play a visuomotor, not just visual, role in reaching.
Pointing studies have revealed similar sPOS activations (Con-
Figure 5. Individual data for visual direct reaching versus saccades, nonvisual direct reaching versus saccades, and visual versus nonvisual direct reaching. Differences in BOLD responses for the
three conditions from three individual subjects. All subjects exhibited greater activations for either type of reach comparedwith saccades in aPCu (circled in green). Subjects showed variability in the
location and amount of superior POS activation in the visual direct versus nonvisual direct reach comparison (see arrows and small purple-blue circles). Visual direct reaching comparedwith saccades
(top row) activated the sPOS region more than nonvisual direct reaching compared with saccades (middle row) in seven of eight subjects. L, Left; R, right; vis., visual.
Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 • 2969
nolly et al., 2003). The sPOS may plan pointing movements by
visual target location and visually perceived, rather than actual,
movement direction (Fernandez-Ruiz et al., 2007). The sPOSwas
active when visually perceived pointing movements matched vi-
sual target locations, not muscle activations [e.g., when reversing
prismsmade leftwardmovements appear rightward (Fernandez-
Ruiz et al., 2007)], suggesting that sPOS encodes targets and
movement plans in eye-centered coordinates. Also, sPOS prefers
visual targets that can be acted on in near-space versus far-away
targets (Quinlan and Culham, 2007; Culham et al., 2008), sug-
gesting that sPOS contains visuomotor representations for
action.
sPOS may be homologous to macaque V6A, where neurons
are modulated by visual feedback during reaching (Fattori et al.,
2001).
Reaching versus pointing
Filimon (2008) found stronger precuneus activations for arm
versus fingermovements; finger activations were shifted laterally.
Finger pointing may not realistically approximate the reaching
tasks used with macaques; thus, pointing-defined “PRRs” may
differ from true (arm) parietal reach regions. Some pointing
studies have labeled sPOS activations as PRR (Fernandez-Ruiz et
al., 2007).Our greater aPCu activations for actual reaching versus
saccades are consistent with studies that involved wrist (Astafiev
et al., 2003) or forearm (Levy et al., 2007) movements. In con-
trast, studies of index finger movements found no aPCu activa-
tion differences between pointing and saccades (Hagler et al.,
2007).
Other regions
Although we focused on the differential contributions of aPCu
and sPOS to reaching versus saccades, additional parietal and
frontal areas were also activated, consistent with previous reports
on reaching (Filimon et al., 2007), reaching to grasp (Grafton et
al., 1996; Culham et al., 2003), reaching to point or touch (Pelli-
jeff et al., 2006; Levy et al., 2007), pointing (Connolly et al., 2000,
2003; Simon et al., 2002; Astafiev et al., 2003, 2004; Mendendorp
et al., 2003; Fernandez-Ruiz et al., 2007; Hagler et al., 2007), and
saccades (Culham et al., 1998; Connolly et al., 2000; Sereno et al.,
2001; Koyama et al., 2004, Simon et al., 2002).
Posterior parietal regions more active for reaching than sac-
cades included anterior IPS/supramarginal gyrus. These regions
may represent human homologs of macaque AIP (Culham et al.,
2003, 2006) and area 7b (Culham and Kanwisher, 2001), and
were likely activated by hand-related rather than arm-related sen-
sory stimulation during movement. Human homologs for ma-
caque arm-movement areas have been proposed in medial pari-
etal areas, however, which were the focus of the present study.
Medial IPS was also coactivated with aPCu. It is possible that
mIPS and aPCu form a functional unit. Other areas, e.g., the
postcentral sulcus and the anterior superior parietal gyrus, likely
correspond to macaque area 5. Our results show a gradual
proprioceptive-to-visual transition from anterior to posterior
parts of the posterior parietal lobule, from reach-only areas that
do not respond to saccades in the very anterior parts of the pos-
terior parietal lobule and at the posterior end of the cingulate
sulcus, to both-reach-and-saccade areas in medial IPS and ante-
rior precuneus, to more posterior reach areas modulated by vi-
sion of the hand and saccades (sPOS). This implies that even
more functional subdivisions exist, supporting a network ofmul-
tiple reach regions in humans.
aPCu and attention
Attention also activates the human precuneus (Beauchamp et al.,
2001), consistent with attentional modulation in macaque pari-
etal cortex (e.g., V6A, Galletti et al., 2003). However, attention is
an unlikely explanation for our aPCu reaching activations. Co-
vert (non-eye movement) attentional shifts activate the precu-
neus less than either saccades or pointing (Beauchamp et al.,
2001; Astafiev et al., 2003). Here, overt saccades activated aPCu
significantly less than reaching; thus, covert attention should ac-
tivate aPCu even less. Finally, in additional tests we found that
continuous arm, but not continuous finger or hand-only move-
ments, activate aPCu with eyes closed, again ruling out greater
attention to a continuously moving limb as the source of aPCu
activation. Thus, the aPCu activations found here most likely
reflect arm-movement execution rather than nonspecific spatial
attention.
The term “parietal reach region” has been used loosely in the
literature, with areas from the sPOS to the posterior cingulate
sulcus all termed “PRR.” Our results suggest that multiple, func-
tionally distinct posterior parietal subregions participate in dif-
ferent aspects of reaching in humans.
References
Andersen RA, Buneo CA (2002) Intentional maps in posterior parietal cor-
tex. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:189–220.
Astafiev SV, ShulmanGL, StanleyCM, SnyderAZ,VanEssenDC,CorbettaM
(2003) Functional organization of human intraparietal and frontal cor-
tex for attending, looking, and pointing. J Neurosci 23:4689–4699.
Astafiev SV, Stanley CM, ShulmanGL, CorbettaM (2004) Extrastriate body
area in human occipital cortex responds to the performance of motor
actions. Nat Neurosci 7:542–548.
BeauchampMS, Petit L, Ellmore TM, Ingeholm J, Haxby JV (2001) A para-
metric fMRI study of overt and covert shifts of visuospatial attention.
Neuroimage 14:310–321.
BeauchampMS, YasarNE, KishanN, RoT (2007) HumanMSTbut notMT
responds to tactile stimulation. J Neurosci 27:8261–8267.
Breveglieri R, Galletti C, Gamberini M, Passarelli L, Fattori P (2006) So-
matosensory cells in area PEc ofmacaque posterior parietal cortex. J Neu-
rosci 26:3679–3684.
Cavada C (2001) The visual parietal areas in the macaque monkey: current
structural knowledge and ignorance. Neuroimage 14:S21–S26.
Connolly JD, Goodale MA, Desouza JFX, Menon RS, Vilis T (2000) A com-
parison of frontoparietal fMRI activation during anti-saccades and anti-
pointing. J Neurophysiol 84:1645–1655.
Connolly JD, Andersen RA, Goodale MA (2003) fMRI evidence for a ‘pari-
etal reach region’ in the human brain. Exp Brain Res 153:140–145.
Cox RW (1996) AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional
magnetic neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res 29:162–173.
Culham JC, Kanwisher NG (2001) Neuroimaging of cognitive functions in
human parietal cortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:157–163.
Culham JC, Valyear KF (2006) Human parietal cortex in action. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 16:205–212.
Culham JC, Brandt SA, Cavanagh P, Kanwisher NG, Dale AM, Tootell RB
(1998) Cortical fMRI activation produced by attentive tracking of mov-
ing targets. J Neurophysiol 80:2657–2670.
Culham JC, Danckert SL, DeSouza JFX, Gati JS, Menon RS, Goodale MA
(2003) Visually guided grasping produces fMRI activation in dorsal but
not ventral stream areas. Exp Brain Res 153:180–189.
Culham JC, Cavina-Pratesi C, Singhal A (2006) The role of parietal cortex in
visuomotor control: what have we learned from neuroimaging? Neuro-
psychologia 44:2668–2684.
Culham JC, Gallivan J, Cavina-Pratesi C, Quinlan DJ (2008) fMRI investi-
gations of reaching and ego space in human superior parieto-occipital
cortex. In: Embodiment, ego-space and action (KlatzkyRL, BehrmannM,
MacWhinney B, eds), pp 247–274. New York: Psychology.
Dale AM, Fischl B, Sereno MI (1999) Cortical surface-based analysis I: seg-
mentation and surface reconstruction. Neuroimage 9:179–194.
Fattori P, GamberiniM,KutzDF,Galletti C (2001) ‘Arm-reaching’ neurons
2970 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations
in the parietal area V6A of the macaque monkey. Eur J Neurosci
13:2309–2313.
Fernandez-Ruiz J, Goltz HC, DeSouza JFX, Vilis T, Crawford JD (2007)
Human parietal “reach region” primarily encodes extrinsic visual direc-
tion, not extrinsic movement direction, in a visual-motor dissociation
task. Cereb Cortex 17:2283–2292.
Filimon F (2008) Non-spatial posterior parietal activations for finger, hand,
and arm movements in humans. Soc Neurosci Abstr 34:854.16.
Filimon F, Nelson JD, Hagler DJ, Sereno MI (2007) Human cortical repre-
sentations for reaching: mirror neurons for execution, observation, and
imagery. Neuroimage 37:1315–1328.
Fischl B, Sereno MI, Dale AM (1999a) Cortical surface-based analysis II:
inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage
9:195–207.
Fischl B, Sereno MI, Tootell RB, Dale AM (1999b) High-resolution inter-
subject averaging and a coordinate system for the cortical surface. Hum
Brain Mapp 8:272–284.
Galletti C, KutzDF,GamberiniM, Breveglieri R, Fattori P (2003) Role of the
medial parieto-occipital cortex in the control of reaching and grasping
movements. Exp Brain Res 153:158–170.
Grafton ST, Fagg AH, Woods RP, Arbib MA (1996) Functional anatomy of
pointing and grasping in humans. Cereb Cortex 6:226–237.
Hagler DJ Jr, Saygin AP, Sereno MI (2006) Smoothing and cluster thresh-
olding for cortical surface-based group analysis of fMRI data. Neuroim-
age 33:1093–1103.
Hagler DJ Jr, Riecke L, Sereno MI (2007) Parietal and superior frontal
visuospatial maps activated by pointing and saccades. Neuroimage
35:1562–1577.
HuangRS, SerenoMI (2008) Visual stimulus presentation using fiber optics
in the MRI scanner. J Neurosci Methods 169:76–83.
Kalaska JF (1996) Parietal cortex area 5 and visuomotor behavior. Can
J Physiol Pharmacol 74:483–498.
KoyamaM,Hasegawa I, Osada T, Adachi Y, Nakahara K,Miyashita Y (2004)
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of macaque monkeys perform-
ing visually guided saccade tasks: comparison of cortical eye fields with
humans. Neuron 41:795–807.
Levy I, SchluppeckD,HeegerDJ, Glimcher PW (2007) Specificity of human
cortical areas for reaches and saccades. J Neurosci 27:4687–4696.
MedendorpWP, Goltz HC, Vilis T, Crawford JD (2003) Gaze-centered up-
dating of visual space in human parietal cortex. J Neurosci 23:6209–6214.
Pellijeff A, Bonilha L, Morgan PS, McKenzie K, Jackson SR (2006) Parietal
updating of limbposture: an event-related fMRI study.Neuropsychologia
44:2685–2690.
Perenin MT, Vighetto A (1988) Optic ataxia: a specific disruption in visuo-
motormechanisms. Different aspects of the deficit in reaching for objects.
Brain 111:643–674.
Prado J, Clavagnier S, Otzenberger H, Scheiber C, Kennedy H, Perenin MT
(2005) Two cortical systems for reaching in central and peripheral vision.
Neuron 48:849–858.
QuinlanDJ, Culham JC (2007) fMRI reveals a preference for near viewing in
the human parieto-occipital cortex. Neuroimage 36:167–187.
Raichle ME, Snyder AZ (2007) A default mode of brain function: a brief
history of an evolving idea. Neuroimage 37:1083–1090; discussion
1097–1099.
Scheperjans F, Eickhoff SB, Ho¨mke L, Mohlberg H, Hermann K, Amunts K,
Zilles K (2008) Probabilistic maps, morphometry, and variability of cy-
toarchitectonic areas in the human superior parietal cortex. Cereb Cortex
18:2141–2157.
Sereno MI, Pitzalis S, Martinez A (2001) Mapping of contralateral space in
retinotopic coordinates by a parietal cortical area in humans. Science
294:1350–1354.
Simon O, Mangin JF, Cohen L, Le Bihan D, Dehaene S (2002) Topograph-
ical layout of hand, eye, calculation, and language-related areas in the
human parietal lobe. Neuron 33:475–487.
Snyder LH, Batista AP, Andersen RA (1997) Coding of intention in the
posterior parietal cortex. Nature 386:167–170.
Ward BD (2000) Deconvolution analysis of fMRI time series data. AFNI
3dDeconvolve documentation, Medical College of Wisconsin.
Wolpert DM, Goodbody SJ, Husain M (1998) Maintaining internal repre-
sentations: the role of the human superior parietal lobe. Nat Neurosci
1:529–533.
Filimon et al. • Visual and Proprioceptive Reaching Representations J. Neurosci., March 4, 2009 • 29(9):2961–2971 • 2971
